.. _page_sfd:

SFD Files
=========

A Scrutiny Firmware Description (SFD) file defines all variables and aliases available in a firmware, along with additional metadata.
Each SFD file also includes a 128 bits hash, called the Firmware ID, that uniquely identifies the firmware.

When a device connects, the server requests its Firmware ID and uses it to load the corresponding SFD file from storage.

A SFD file is nothing more than a .zip archive containing the following files:

  - firmwareid
  - varmap.json
  - alias.json
  - metadata.json

In this section, we will describe in details the content of each of these files.
Knowing their format is **NOT** required to use Scrutiny.
They are documented here primarily to help readers better understand the overall Scrutiny ecosystem.

.. _firmwareid_file:

Firwmare ID
-----------

A text file containing the firmware hash in ASCII format.
The hash is a 128 bits value expressed as a hexadecimal string, and therefore must contain exactly 32 characters.

The Firmware ID can be extracted with the :ref:`make_metadata <cmd_get-firmware-id>` command.

.. _varmap_file:

VarMap file
-----------

The VarMap is a JSON file that defines the memory mapping of a firmware, eessentially a simplified form of the debugging symbols.
It maps variables (each having an address, a type, and additional attributes) to a tree‑structured path represented in a flat format.

Example :

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "endianness": "little",
        "type_map": {
            "0" : { "name": "int", "type": "sint32" }
        },
        "variables": {
            "/path1/path2/some_int32": {
                "type_id": "0",
                "addr": 1000
            },
            "/path1/path2/some_int32_with_enum": {
                "type_id": "0",
                "addr": 1004,
                "enum": "0"
            },
        },
        "enums": {
            "0": {
                "name": "EnumA",
                "values": {
                    "eVal1": 0,
                    "eVal2": 1,
                    "eVal3": 100,
                    "eVal4": 101
                }
            }
        }
    }

In the example above, we see two variables of type "signed int32", defined as ``int`` the source code.
The variable ``some_int32_with_enum``  is associated with an enum, which allows scripts to assign values using
strings and enables the GUI to present a dropdown menu for editing.

The VarMap is generated by Scrutiny using the :ref:`elf2varmap<cmd_elf2varmap>` command on an ELF file that contains debugging symbols.
It is strongly discouraged to edit this file manually or through any means other than the Scrutiny toolchain.
New features may be added over time, and the file format may evolve accordingly.

To avoid bloating the file and slowing down the server when loading SFD files,
array elements are described using index boundaries rather than creating one entry per element.
Otherwise, a single 1 MiB buffer defined as ``uint8_t buffer[1024*1024];`` would generate one million entries in the VarMap.

Below is an example of a multidimensional array of structs, where each struct contains an array of int32 values.

.. code-block:: c++

    struct MyStruct {
        int32_t some_int32[5][6][7];
    };
    MyStruct my_struct_array[4][5];

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "endianness": "little",
        "type_map": {
            "0" : { "name": "int", "type": "sint32" }
        },
        "variables": {
            "/global/my_namespace/my_struct_array/my_struct_array/some_int32": {
                "type_id": "0",
                "addr" : 1000,
                "array_segments" : {
                    "/global/my_namespace/my_struct_array/my_struct_array" : {
                        "dims" : [3,4],
                        "byte_size" : 840
                    },
                    "/global/my_namespace/my_struct_array/my_struct_array/some_int32" : {
                        "dims" : [5,6,7],
                        "byte_size" : 4
                    }
                }
            },
        }
    }

In the example above, the server must be able to interpret the path

``/global/my_namespace/my_struct_array/my_struct_array[2][3]/some_int32[1][4][5]``

as referring to a signed 32 bit integer located at address: 1000 + 840*(2*4+3) + 4*(1*6*7+4*7+5) = 10540

Additionally, the VarMap can represent pointed variables.
Pointed variables are included when :ref:`elf2varmap<cmd_elf2varmap>` is invoked with the ``--dereference-pointers``
option. They are defined as an offset relative to the value of another variable.

Example:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "endianness": "little",
        "type_map": {
            "0" : { "name": "int", "type": "sint32" },
            "1" : { "name": "_ptr32", "type": "ptr32" }
        },
        "variables": {
            "/path1/path2/some_ptr": {
                "type_id": "1",
                "addr": 1000
            },
            "/path1/path2/*some_int32": {
                "type_id": "0",
                "pointer" : {
                    "path" : "/path1/path2/some_ptr",
                    "offset" : 0
                }
            },
        }
    }

In the example above, the path ``/path1/path2/*some_int32`` represents a pointed variable, as it does
not have a direct address but instead contains a pointer field.
The asterisk (*) is only a visual cue used to indicate that the variable is pointer-based;
it has no effect on decoding or runtime behavior.

.. _alias_file:

Alias file
----------

An alias is a watchable item that abstracts either a variable or a RPV, and can have an arbitrary tree path.
Its main purpose is to allow a developer to provide a consistent Scrutiny API across software releases,
ensuring that certain elements always appear under the same tree path, regardless of their location in the code.

Aliases are defined inside a file named ``alias.json`` and has the following structure.


.. code-block:: json

    {
        "path/to/alias1" : {
            "target" : "/static/main.cpp/my_var"
        },
        "path/to/alias2" : {
            "target" : "/rpv/x1234"
        },
        "path/to/alias3" : {
            "target" : "/global/my_struct/memberA",
            "gain" : 1000.0,
            "offset" : 500.0,
            "min" : 100.0,
            "max" : 2500.0
        }
    }

The dictionary keys represent the path of the alias, and the dictionary content defines the element referenced by the alias. The available fields are:

.. csv-table:: alias.json fields
    :header: "Field", "Required", "Details"
    :align: center
    :widths: 15 15 70

    "target", "Yes",  "The path to the referenced variable or RPV."
    "gain", "No",  "A gain factor applied to the variable during read/write operations. Defaults to 1 if omitted."
    "offset", "No",  "An offset applied to the variable during read/write operations. Defaults to 0 if omitted."
    "min", "No",  "A minimum value constraint applied to the client input during write operations only."
    "max", "No",  "A maximum value constraint applied to the client input during write operations only."

These optional parameters modify the alias values during data exchange between the client and the device.
They can be used to convert data ranges or change the units of a variable.
For example, a variable ranging from 0 to 1 could be displayed as 0 to 100%, or a value in rad/s could be converted to RPM.
The modifiers are applied according to the following rules.

    - Reading: value_sent_to_client = ``value_read * gain + offset``
    - Writing: value_written_to_device = ``(SATURATE(client_input, min, max) - offset) / gain``

The alias file can be populated with the :ref:`make_metadata <cmd_add-alias>` command.

.. _metadata_file:

Metadata file
-------------

The metadata file also uses the JSON format and contains optional supplementary information about a firmware.

Below is an example of a complete metadata file. Every field is optional and may be omitted without causing any issues.
The information in the metadata file exists solely to be queried by a client, and it is displayed in the GUI when an SFD file is loaded.

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "project_name": "My Super Project",
        "author": "ACME inc.",
        "version": "1.2.3",
        "generation_info": {
            "python_version": "3.10.12",
            "scrutiny_version": "0.12.0",
            "system_type": "Linux",
            "time": 1771790810
        }
    }

.. csv-table:: metadata.json fields
    :header: "Field", "Description"
    :align: center
    :widths: 30 70


    "project_name", "Pretty name for the firmware"
    "author", "Author of the firmware, could be the name of your company."
    "version", "The version of the firmware"
    "generation_info.python_version", "Version of python with which the SFD file has been generated"
    "generation_info.scrutiny_version", "Version of Scrutiny with which the SFD file has been generated"
    "generation_info.system_type", "The type of system on which the SFD has been generated"
    "generation_info.time", "The Epoch timestamp at which the SFD has been generated"

The metadata file can be generated with the :ref:`make_metadata <cmd_make-metadata>` command.
